In this lecture, we're going
to address how you can bring
multiple DataFrame
objects together,
either by merging
them horizontally
or by concatenating
them vertically.
Before we jump into the code,
we need to address
a little relational theory
and to get some language
conventions down,
I'm going to bring in an image to
help with some of those concepts.
Ok. This is a Venn diagram.
A Venn diagram is traditionally
used to show set membership.
For example, the circle
on the left is
the population of
students at a University,
the circle on the right is
the population of
staff at a University,
and the overlapping region
in the middle are
all of those students
who are also staff.
Maybe these students run
tutorials for a course,
or grade assignments, or engage
in running research experiments.
So this diagram shows
two populations we
might have data about,
but there's overlap
between those populations.
When it comes to
translating this to Pandas,
we can think of the case
where we might have
these two populations as
indices in separate DataFrames,
maybe with the label
of person name.
When we want to join the
DataFrames together
we have some choices to make.
First, what do we want a list of
all the people regardless of
whether they're staff or student,
and all of the information
we can get on them?
In database terminology,
this is called a full Outer join.
In set theory, it's
called a Union.
In the Venn diagram,
it represents everyone
in any circle.
So here's an image
of what that would
look like as a Venn diagram.
It's quite possible
though that we only want
those people who have
maximum information for,
those people who are
both staff and students.
Perhaps being a staff member and
the student involves
getting a tuition waiver,
and we want to calculate
the cost of this.
In database terminology, this
is called an inner join,
or in set theory,
the intersection.
It's represented in
the Venn diagram
as an overlapping part
in each circle.
So here's what that
would look like.
So with that background,
let's see an example of how
we would do this in Pandas,
where we would use
the merge function.
So we'll import pandas as pd.
First, let's create two
DataFrames, staff and students.
So I'll create the staff
DataFrame first,
pd.DataFrame, and I'm going
to pass in a list of dicts.
So the first one, Kelly,
we'll set her role
to Director of HR,
and then we'll
create another one,
Sally, and will set
her role to Course liaison,
then the third person,
James, we'll set
his role to Grader.
Let's index this staff by name.
So staff_df equals
staff_df.set_index('Name').
Now, we'll create this student
DataFrame as well.
So student df equals
pd.DataFrame.
We'll create a student called
James and we'll say he's
in business school.
We'll create a student called
Mike and we'll say
he's in law school,
then we'll create
a student called Sally,
and say she's in engineering.
We're going to index
this by name too,
so student_df equals
student_df.set index name.
Let's just print
out the DataFrame.
So we'll first print out
staff_df.head and then we'll
print student_df.head.
So there's some overlap
in these DataFrames,
and that James and Sally are
both students and staff,
but Mike and Kelly are not.
Importantly, both DataFrames are
indexed along the value
we want to merge them on,
which is called Name.
If we want the Union of these,
we would call merge
passing in the DataFrame
on the left and
the DataFrame on
the right and telling
merge that we want it
to use an outer join.
We would want to use
the left and right
indexes as the joining columns.
So we'll say pd.merge,
we pass in the staff first
and the student
DataFrames second,
so that's our left and our right.
We set the how
parameter to outer.
By default, it's
inner, I believe,
so we have to set it here,
and then say that we want
to use the index values.
So we'll set the
left index equal to
true and the right
index equal to true.
We see in the resulting DataFrame
that everybody is listed
and since Mike does not have
a role and John does
not have a school,
those cells are listed
as missing values.
If we wanted to get
the intersection that is
just those people who are
a student and a staff member,
we can set the how
attribute to inner.
Again, we set both the
left and right indices
to be true as
the joining columns.
So we call it pd.merge
and we'd say the left
is the staff,
the right is the student.
How is the inner?
So we're looking for
the intersection here,
and the left, and the right
index values are true.
We see that the
resulting DataFrame
has only James and Sally in it.
Now, there are
two other common use cases
when merging DataFrames,
and both are examples of what
we would call set addition.
The first is when we
want to get a list of
all staff regardless of whether
they're students or not.
But if there were students,
we'd want to get
their student details as well.
To do this, we would
use a left join.
It's important to note that
the order of DataFrames
in this function,
the first DataFrame is
the left DataFrame and
the second is the right.
So pd.merge, staff_df,
that's our left,
student_df, that's our right,
we say how left joins.
So we're interested in
joining against the staff_df
and set left index equal to
true and right index
equal to true.
So you can probably
guess what comes next.
We want a list of all
of the students and
their roles if they
are also staff.
To do this, we would
do a right join.
So we do staff_df on the left,
student_df on the right,
how equals right and
left index equals true and
right index equals true.
We can also do it one other way.
The merge method has a couple
of other interesting parameters.
First, you don't need to
use indices to join on,
you can use columns as well.
Here's an example. Here we have
a parameter called "on" and
then we can assign a column
that both DataFrames, have
using the joining column.
So first, let's remove our index.
So we'll reset
the index on the staff
DataFrame and we'll reset
the index honors
student DataFrame.
Now let's merge using
the on parameter.
So pd.merge, staff on the left,
student on the right,
we want a right join,
and then we just
pass on equals name.
So we're saying join
on that column.
So using the "on" parameter
instead of an index is
how I find myself
using merge the most.
In fact, I rarely use indices
in pandas DataFrames,
especially where
I'm just cleaning
data as opposed to
doing data analysis.
So what happens when we have
conflicts between the DataFrames?
Let's take a look by
creating new staff and
student DataFrames that have
a location information.
So I'm going to create
a new staff DataFrame.
I'm going to say Kelly,
her role is Director of HR,
but I'm also going to a
location of State Street.
Sally, role Course liaison
and location of
Washington Avenue,
then James is a Grader,
and I'll say he's also
on Washington Avenue.
Then for our students, we'll say
James is Business school,
the location is on
Billiard Avenue,
Mike's Law School and
his location is
Fraternity House Number 22,
and then Sally's school,
Engineering and her location
is on Wilson Crescent.
The staff DataFrame, this is
an office location where we
can find the staff person,
and we can see
the Director of HR is on
State Street while
the two students
are on Washington Ave.
These locations
just happened to be
right outside my window
as I film this.
But for the student DataFrame,
the location information is
actually their home address.
The merge function
preserves this information,
but depends either on
underscore x or underscore y to
help differentiate which index
went with which column of data.
The underscore x is always
the left DataFrame
information and
the underscore y is always
the right DataFrame information.
So here, if we want all
of the staff information,
regardless of whether
they are students or not,
but if they are
students, we want to get
their student details as well,
then we would do a left join
on the column of name.
So pd.merge staff, student,
we're joining across the left
because we want to get
all of the information of
students who are joining on Name.
From the output, we
can see that there are
columns location_x
and location_y.
Location_x refers to
the location column
in the left dataframe,
which is a staff dataframe
and location_y refers
to the column in
the right dataframe
which is the student dataframes.
Before we leave
merging of dataframes,
let's talk about multi indexing
and multiple columns.
It's quite possible that
the first name for students
and staff might overlap,
but the last name might not.
In this case, we can use a list
of multiple columns
that should be used to
join keys from both dataframes
using the on parameter.
Recall that the column name
assigned to the parameter
need to exist in both dataframes.
So here's an example with
some new first and
staff name data.
So I'm just going to
paste this in quickly.
But what you can see is that
people now have a last name.
So as you can see
here, James Wilde
and James Hammond don't
match on both keys since they
have different last names.
So we would expect
that an inner join
doesn't include these
individuals in the output,
and only Sally Brooks
would be retained.
So pd.merge staff_df, student_df,
we want an inner join,
and then for on we actually
pass in a python list,
that's a list of the columns
that we're interested in,
those all have to match,
so first name and last name.
So joining dataframes through
merging is incredibly common,
and you'll need to know how to
pull data from different sources,
clean it, and join
it for analysis.
This is a staple
not only of pandas,
but of database
technologies as well.
If we think of merging as
joining ''horizontally,''
meaning we join on similar values
in a column found
in two dataframes,
then concatenating is joining
''vertically,'' meaning we
put dataframes on top or at
the bottom of one another.
So let's understand
this from an example.
You have a dataset that tracks
some information over the years,
and each year's record
is separate CSV,
and every CSV of
every year's record has
the exact same columns.
What happens if you want
to put all of that data,
from all of the records
together so you can
concatenate them?
Let's take a look at
the US Department
of Education College
Scorecard data.
It has each US university's data
on student completion,
student debt, after
graduation income, and others.
The data is stored
in separate CSVs,
with each CSV containing
a year's record.
Let's say we wanted
the records from 2011-2013.
We create first three dataframes,
each containing
one year's record,
and because the CSV files
we're working with are messy,
I want to suppress some of
the Jupyter warning
messages and just
tell read_csv to
ignore bad lines.
So I'm going to
start the cell with
the cell magic, %%capture.
So you don't have to
worry about this.
It's just to suppress
output as we're loading
these CSV files because
there are errors in them.
So %%capture, remember that
has to be at the very
beginning of the cell,
any cell logic magic functions
have to be right
the first line of the cell,
and then we want df_2011,
so we will read_csv from
a college scorecards,
and this is MERGED2011_12.
Then you say
error_bad_lines=False.
That's just telling Pandas
not to bother throwing an error,
and I'll do that for 2012 again,
that's
datasets/college_scorecardMERGED2013,
and then df_2013 as well.
All right. Let's get a view
of one of the dataframes.
So I'll take 2011, and we'll just
look at the top three
rows in that.
So we see there's
a whopping number of columns,
more than 1900, and we can
calculate the length of
each dataframe as well.
So you do print len df_2011,
print len df_2012, and
we'll print len df_2013.
So it's a bit surprising with
the number of schools
and the scorecard
for 2011 is almost double
that of the next two years.
But let's not worry about that.
That's probably buried somewhere
in the docs why that is.
Instead, let's just put
all three dataframes
in a list and call
the list frames and
pass the list into
the concat function.
So let's see what
that looks like.
So we'll say frames is equal to,
this is a list of
our three dataframes.
So df_2011, df_ 2012,
df_2013 and then we
just call pd.concat.
So that's a function on
Pandas top-level module and
we pass the list of frames.
So as you can see, we
have more observations in
one dataframe and
the columns remain the same.
If we scroll down to
the bottom of the output,
we can see there
are a total of over
30,000 rows after concatenating
the three dataframes.
Let's double check and let's
quickly add the number of
rows of the three dataframes
to see if they match.
So we'll just say the len
of df_2011 plus the len of
df_2012 plus the len of df_2013.
Great. The two numbers match,
which means our
concatenation is successful.
But wait, not all of the data
is concatenated together,
we don't know
what observations are
from what year anymore.
So actually,
the concat function has
a parameter that solves
such a problem with
the keys parameter,
and we can set
an extra level of index.
We pass in a list of the keys
that we want to correspond to
the dataframes in as
the keys parameter.
So let's try it out.
So pd.concat, we pass in
our list of dataframes,
and then we just say
the keys we want to
be 2011, 2012, 2013.
So now we have
the indices as the year.
So we know what observations
are from what year.
You should know
that concatenation
also has inner and outer methods.
If you're concatenating
two dataframes that
do not have identical columns,
and choose the outer methods,
some cells will be NaN.
If you choose to do the inner,
then some observations will
be dropped due to NaN values.
You can think this as
analogous to the left
and right joints of
the merge function.
Now you know how to
merge and concatenate
dataframes together.
You'll find such functions very
useful for combining data to get
more complex or complicated
results to do analysis with.
A solid understanding
of how to merge data
is absolutely essential
when you're procuring,
cleaning, and manipulating data.
It's worth knowing how to join
different dataframes quickly,
and the different
operations that you
can use when joining data sets,
and I would encourage you to
check out the pandas docs
for more on joining and
concatenating data.